The Big Z. He would occasionally come to see me and tell him, he never tried to pressure me into changing a grade, but he would say that this guy, how's he doing, you know.
He came to my office though personally, asked me how's he doing, you know, and would it be helpful to give him a tutor and stuff like that.
So he called me the Big Z.
Did he ever ask for anything?
He never asked me to change a grade or anything like that.
No, no, no.
That's one thing that's never happened to me here, because I got to know the football coaches pretty well, because my students got jobs there tutoring.
See they got jobs there tutoring.
But they never asked for a grade change or anything like that.
Of the football coaches, and I'm going to ask the negative, of the football coaches, which ones would you give the highest marks to in doing things the way they should have?
Oh goodness, I don't remember his name.
He was the guy who was here when we had Woodard in a cloud of dust.
In fact the son of his assistant coach became an end for us just recently.
But he came from a high school.
You can probably figure it out though.
I should remember.
Baumgartner was the assistant coach.
I remember him.
It's in the 70s because Tony Franklin was the kicker on that team.
But I can't remember the name of the coach.
But I thought he ran a good show.
Now I've had nothing to do with the subsequent guys, so I don't know.
But I have every reason to believe our current coach runs a clean show.
Did you ever get any
any calls or any kind of contact from politicians, former students, any outsider trying to influence a grade?
Never, never, never, never.
In 46 years, never at once.
Great.
And what about, let's see, you weren't part of the group to decide who got admitted to the graduate program, so you didn't get any pressure about letting my son... No, no, no, no.
No we're pretty good about that, that we have a graduate, a man who's in charge of admission to graduate school, and he will at times give you a folder.
Just what do you think of this person?
That's all.
But he makes the decision pretty much on his own.
Okay.
All right, let's go back to campus events.
You and your colleagues had a good respect for Earl Rutter.
Were you all aware of any approaching health problems before his death?
No, at least I wasn't.
I never heard anybody talk about it either.
I wasn't either.
Had he been ill?
Was it known that he'd been quite ill prior to his death?
His heart and kidney were giving him trouble, I now know, for two or three months.
Well, weren't the physicians aware of this?
Big pardon?
Weren't the physicians aware of this?
Apparently so.
But the medications also, for the two, each made the other problem worse.
Oh, that's too bad.
And do you remember any reaction when Jack Williams came as President?
Well the general feeling was that he was a healthy addition, that he was a breath of fresh air, you know, that he was smelling roses now.
Did you all feel good about him academically?
Oh yeah, I think that my feeling and the feeling of my peers, the ones with whom I discussed such matters,
was that this is a good guy.
He's going to be a plus, a big plus to the institution.
All right, now, Zener, by that time, was the vice president for academic affairs.
Zener got to that job?
I knew he was dean of science.
Briefly.
Ah, okay.
And then John Calhoun became the vice president.
Ah, okay, okay.
What did you all think of that team of Calhoun and Williams?
I say the general attitude was a very favorable one that, you know, that things are going to get better around here.
We're going to become more like a real university should be.
Well I think we've gotten pretty darn close to that now.
But it took these steps by these individuals.
And were you all happy that things like the cyclotron and the growth of graduate programs all across the campus, did you all like that?
Yeah, very definitely, because this, you know, marks you as a university.
And in the department, was there, was the growth rate of research up sharply?
Yeah, however, yes it was, but however I attribute this more to Martell than anything else.
Where did he go to find more support?
Did he help to dig up money?
Well, I think mostly, like I say, he went to administration here with his letter.
But on the other hand, his reputation was such
that he could go to companies.
And they set up, I forget what they call it, but it's a group of industrial companies, chemical companies, and the group exists to this day, the only thing I don't remember is what they call it, that contribute financially to the department.
And so he certainly set that up.
Now in that effort, we were beginning to be competitive with what other
You're talking about, oh yeah, UT for one, Purdue, Michigan, maybe not California and MIT and Harvard, but I think with the well-known public universities, like I say Michigan, University of Texas, which are highly rated, Purdue, that we're ranked up there with Minnesota,
Did we have any closer relations with certain chemistry departments?
Were there two or three that we were?
Not really, not really.
Was there any that A&M was kind of using as a model?
Oh, I can't point to one.
Now Martell had been, where was he before he came here?
Illinois Institute of Technology.
But he had been for a long time at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts.
That's where he really got his professional recognition.
Because Dow Chemical Company was right there.
And they had come up with this new chelating agent that had acquired very important industrial applications.
And he worked with them very intimately.
Who identified Martell?
Do you know?
It was not.
But I think
other members of the faculty.
I think Isbell was important in saying this man is available.
He's one that I can think of.
But other than that, I wouldn't be able to give you any information.
Did he hit the ground running?
Oh, yes.
When he got here?
Oh, you bet.
I mean, he surely did.
Describe his personality.
What did he look like and how did he go about doing things?
Well, I suppose there's a time when
A little dictatorial power is not a bad thing to get things done and get the ball rolling.
And I must admit, he's that kind of a guy.
He's the boss, there's no question about it.
And was that true from day one?
Yes.
From the minute his shoes were planted on this campus, that was true.
Probably more so at the very start than subsequently.
Subsequently, gave in a little bit.
We had different committees that reported to him and such.
And he was department head about how many years?
Well, he came in 67, and it's only, I'd say, a good, gee, maybe 20 years, maybe, yeah, yeah.
And during that time, who were the key members of the department head staff?
Oh man, he had a fellow named Shapiro, but Shapiro was strictly a,
administrative aid.
He did some chemistry and it was good, but it was kind of a minor part of his responsibilities.
And then he relied heavily on input from the new well-known professors I brought in.
He was very close to Professor Tsutsui, for example.
He brought him in.
He'd known him previously.
He would periodically bring in some well-known person that he knew, like he brought the fellow Japanese name, I forget his name, to just come in every so often and sit down and show them what the department was doing, where it was going, did he have any ideas what else we should do, this kind of stuff.
Martell physically was what, 5'8", 5'9", average size?
Yeah, about 5'8".
Sense of humor?
Not much of one at all.
No, not much of one at all.
No, he was all business.
Hard worker?
Oh yes.
You don't get things done like he didn't.
He had a very, very large research program, you know, it was big.
Himself?
Himself, yeah.
And he normally was here on campus from what hour to what hour?
Oh heavens, I'd say, you know, I don't know, I didn't keep track of it, but he usually was here when I got in.
And he was here all day long when I left.
He put in a full day, no question about it.
Did he have any particular pet peeves, things that really bugged him?
Well, I think he expected all of his faculty to be able to get a federal research grant.
He sized it up that way.
I don't agree with that.
because there's a hell of a lot of politics going into that, and there's things like what's currently fashionable in the research area and such.
But he felt that if you didn't do that, and then he was very, very adamant in his feelings about
what you did and how you did it.
And, well, he didn't think that, you know, we get these ratings, teaching evaluations.
He didn't think much of those things.
I know that.
He largely evaluated people on the basis of research productivity.
I don't think that's entirely correct.
I think in the university there should be a little bit more.
Who, in those long years you were
in the faculty of the department, who were the best teachers in the department?
You mean actual teachers?
Yes.
Well you know several left, like Henry Rakoff, and they were I think exceptionally good teachers.
Gee whiz, I have a hard time remembering because you're going way back.
Because when Martell first came, how should I put it, the writing was on the wall, you know.
If you were really a good teacher, you probably didn't have a great future in that department.
That's a perfectly honest statement.
I think Arthur Martell would agree to it.
And were you expected to produce a good stream of doctoral students?
You're expected to produce a good steady stream of publications and get money.
That's the two key things.
You know that thing about publications, and I don't think they mean that much.
I just got through reviewing an article, for example, today.
perfectly good, but not really important.
I mean, of every 500 that you review, there'll be one or two that are really meaningful science medicine.
But that's part of our system, and I'm not going to, you know, fight it.
Like they say, they say, deans and heads may not be able to read or write, but they can count.
You've heard that.
Yes.
In all of your research,
What was your first, as you think back, what was your first important publication?
Oh, heavens.
You mean something I really thought was worthwhile?
Yeah, early on.
Well, how can I tell you now?
How can I tell you?
I think it was a really clever synthesis of telluranthrine because the literature had totally made a mess of it.
And I came up with what I think was a really bright synthetic procedure.
About when was that?
About 1980.
Oh.
And then when it was at Oak Ridge I think we turned out a very, very nice paper on uranium extraction which got a lot of recognition and got beautiful reviews when we submitted it for publication.
But most recently, right now, I'm hoping that what I'm working on right now may be the most important thing I've ever done.
What is it?
Well, I don't know.
I'm working with MD Anderson on some arsenic compounds.
We started working with arsenic in 1959.
Excellent results on in vitro testing against cancer lines.
It's also been done by the National Institutes of Health and very interesting results.
And we've got a patent that was filed in January.
And now we're waiting for animal testing.
So that the arsenic would be a deterrent?
It would kill cancer cells without bothering normal cells.
But this is something I tell you, and it's by no means meaningful at the present time.
All right, but let's go back to the beginning.
What was your first scholarly publication?
My first one was, hell, that goes back to 1948 or 49.
When I was a graduate student.
Really?
Yeah.
Where, what?
At the University of Kansas.
No, what journal?
Oh, Journal of the American Chemical Society.
It was a very, you know, prestigious journal.
And I thought, man, that was great, you know, when I was 20, how old was I?
23 years old or something like that.
I thought it was a pretty fantastic event in my life.
Is there, is there one, of all your research, of which are you most proud?
Well, I think, like I say, I think these, this group of varsity companies.
That you're working on.
Yeah.
Because it started up back in 1978 or 79, because I was really annoyed.
I'd sent a research application, I forget who, Department of Energy, one of those guys.
And they sent it back and said, our guys have tried to do this, they've never been able to do this, so we don't think there's any future in it.
And I came up with an idea that would work, and it worked.
I'm proud of that because I get annoyed when people say it can't be done.
About how many, if we were to count them, how many publications?
Total?
Right now?
About 220.
And if we tallied up all of the research funding that you have gathered
and brought to the campus, what might that be?
Oh heavens, I really can't tell you, but for a period of about three years I was getting over $200,000 a year.
Other than that, you know, it's in the neighborhood, it varied, you know.
Years ago when I got my first one from the Atomic Energy Commission in 59, it was only $18,000.
But it was okay for them because a graduate student would only get
$150 a month or something like that, you see.
So it'd be pretty difficult to tally it.
I could do it.
I'm sure the file was there in the department files, but for a couple of years I got between $200,000 and $250,000 a year, which was my top, so I've never gone back there.
In all of these years, have you done any research and or teaching off campus at other places?
Well, we had this extension program with Dow Chemical, did you know that?
Where was that?
Freeport.
At Freeport, okay.
You know, let you think of it though, like just the, you brought up the subject.
The Welch Foundation alone has been given me only since 1960.
That's 40 years.
So that's going to come out to over a million dollars, I think.
So you know, a lot was probably a million and a half or so, you know.
Now, the Welch Foundation has been truly significant to the chemistry program here, hasn't it?
Oh, yes.
I think so.
What were the original close links that got A&M and Welch together?
Do you know?
Well, it's just the nature of the will that Mr. Welch left.
In other words, they had his money, a lot of money.
And they were obligated by law
and by what's written in the will to give out this money.
So where else to give it?
But A&M wasn't getting much of it when you got here.
Well, not as much as University of Texas or Rice, because they had big, well-established research programs.
As far as you know, how do our Welch monies compare now with Rice and UT?
Oh, I think they're very comparable.
Absolutely.
Very much so.
Virtually every member of faculty has one.
As far as you know, does the Welch Foundation fund research here fairly?
As far as I know, they do.
As far as I know.
People may have a different opinion, but I think they do.
Is there any other fund anywhere else in the nation?
like Welch?
No, there's no fund in the world, I think.
Maybe Nobel may do it.
That funds strictly for chemistry, and then restrict it to the state.
Yeah, that's what I was meaning.
For chemistry in this state.
No, heavens, there's nothing like it.
That is marvelous.
It's a real plus for the state.
Well, the initial amount of money they started with, man, they've turned it into, what, about $600 million now?
I mean, they've done a great job investing that money.
Great job.
Now, the Welch money,
goes to research projects.
Strictly, yeah.
And then graduate students get support for their part of that project, don't they?
Absolutely, yeah.
Now, one thing they do with these smaller liberal arts schools, they give them money.
And that's not for research.
It's just to promote their chemistry programs.
But it still has to be used for chemistry in other ways.
Now, throughout most of your years here,
your salary has come partly from state funding and partly from the research projects.
Well, in the research projects, rarely, except for summer.
Summer salary.
Summer salary, absolutely.
At times, you go half, I've gone half-time teaching and gotten half from the research grant.
That's happened to me several occasions.
About when did you feel that you had appropriately good research facilities here?
Well, I'd say about somewhere 65 to 70.
And since that time, you've been relatively comfortable?
Not only that, I think they've just gotten better on a regular basis.
The type of equipment we have is
The amount of equipment we have has just increased and always gotten to be, what do they say, state-of-the-art stuff.
There's no doubt about that.
All right, back to chronology.
Jack Williams is president here and Calhoun the vice president.
Did you and your colleagues feel that A&M was making academic progress?
Yeah, very definitely.
We thought we were.
Actually, you know, assuming the visage of a real university.
Then Dr. Williams gets sick.
He died, didn't he, from heart attacks?
Yes.
And of all the presidents you have observed here, from David Morgan to the present, I'm not going to ask the negative, to which of those presidents would you give the highest marks for their leadership?
That's easy.
Earl Rudder, without question.
Anybody else?
Well, Williams was real good, and Morgan I liked a lot, too.
I hardly remember the others.
I didn't ever pay much attention to what's going on in the upper echelons.
But your answer is almost exactly the same as everybody else's.
To which deans of science would you give the highest mark?
Oh, I like Mac Prescott.
I really like Mac Prescott.
Describe him as dean.
Well, once again, I feel that when you can pick up the phone,
talk to your superior and he has the time and the ear for you, that's what counts.
And he never gave me a big song and dance.
I would go there, I mean once again I always could get to see him, we'd sit down and talk, he'd listen to what you had to say, and more often than not he would satisfy my request.
Now here's another couple, one or so deans, one or so, I'd like to mention one whose name I shan't give, who always told me what he was going to do for me, but never did a dadgum thing, nothing.
But at the time I'd see him, he'd say, oh, I'm going to send you to this meeting and nothing ever happened.
I mean I'm like a guy who doesn't give me a lot of B.S.
to be put.
And also, if he's going to say no, no.
There's no arguing about it.
But more often than not, I got help from Mac Prescott.
Did you all think that he was sensitive to what real research was all about?
Well, I think so, because he had himself, he had personal experience in the field.
That means a lot.
Now, I like Zener a great deal.
I just think Zener didn't give a damn about administrative problems of the dean.
He was a true scientist.
I mean like I said, every time I went there, he got the chalk and the blackboard and I had to listen to a physics lecture.
Did you ever do any, have any important research cooperation with people from outside the chemistry department?
Well I do now.
Very, very intense with MD Anderson people.
But none here on the campus.
And I'm trying to remember the, not really, no.
Peripheral perhaps, you know, but not.
What about relations between the chemistry department and chemical engineering?
Oh they've always, I feel, have been, you know, real good.
There's never been any bad feelings.
Well I know one guy I admire greatly was Charlie Holland from chemical engineering.
Because if anybody ever worked hard for his department and built a good department by his labors, Charlie did that.
When did y'all get acquainted?
Oh, heck, I got acquainted shortly after I got here.
So you've been friends ever since?
Yeah, he's a fine man.
You bet.
He's a fine man.
Let me turn it off and tell you how that it goes.
As you think about all of these 40 years plus,
What are some of the happiest moments for you as a faculty member, as a parent, as a husband?
Well, I got the research award.
That certainly was the happiest moment, 67 or 68, I don't remember.
Okay.
And... Yeah, oh yeah, my watch, I got it.
How did you, did you have any hint that you were going to win it?
Not really.
No, I don't believe I did.
Uh-uh.
And was it $1,000?
No, I think it was, maybe, no, I think it was $1,000.
What did you do with the money?
Criminy, I don't remember.
I just socked it away in the bank.
I might have taken my wife out to dinner.
And you didn't take a special trip or anything?
No, it was not a convenient time.
What did your buddies in the department, what did they say?
Well, they were all very, you know,
generous in their praise and shook your hand.
Nobody was resentful that I'm aware of.
Don't you think it was good that in those days you learned that you were an award winner in the presence of almost all of the faculty?
Yeah, it's a good feeling.
I thought that was really, really good and that it was a surprise
But a very, very pleasant surprise.
Well, I felt real good when we beat Texas when you were 13-7, I remember.
Because one of the kids in my class was a linebacker.
And I saw him right after the game.
He was still in uniform.
I don't remember his name.
He was thrilled.
Did athletics ever ask you to undo a grade?
Never.
Like I've told you, this is one thing I never encountered.
There was never pressure to raise a grade.
Never, never, never.
The only thing they always did was ask me whether, at times, this guy, do you think this guy can pass or not, you know?
And I would give him an honest answer.
And they'd maybe let him Q drop early on.
Now that's one thing that happened a few times.
And chemistry was considered a pretty demanding elective science course, wasn't it?
Yeah, but we had a special course, which we'd done away.
What was it?
Chemistry 106.
It was a one semester, very, you know, I looked at some of my old tests.
Patsy course.
We did some really honest things in there, you know, real chemistry.
Sort of, general chemistry?
Yeah, yeah.
But, you know, we kind of emphasized some of the practical aspects and things.
And the athletes used to take that.
But I said, it's a good many years, at least 10 outs.
It was discontinued.
Of all the chemistry courses that undergraduates took, which one had the reputation of being the toughest?
Good heavens.
I don't really know.
I would think maybe one of those physical chemistry courses.
But the number, I don't recollect what it is, 318, 319, one of those.
One of the reasons being that the people who taught it were awfully tough.
I mean, that's a fact now.
As far as you know, who, if we were able to poll the students, who were their favorite chemistry teachers?
Right now I can tell you.
Okay.
But neither one, both are instructors, they are not tenured faculty.
Gigi's name is Gopalakrishnan.
I know that he's just extremely popular, and the other fellow, not Pendleton, I always call him Pendleton, but his name is not Pendleton, it's close to that.
Those two, without question, I think are the most
popular people on the faculty.
As far as you know, are they doing a college?
I think they do an outstanding job of teaching, yeah.
I know they're just two doors down from me, and that hallway's always full of kids.
I mean, they are unselfish with respect to the time they give to the students.
Should fine research universities like A&M give more attention to the quality of teaching at the undergraduate level?
Yeah, they really should.
I don't think they do it sufficiently, although actually with these instructorships, they take care of that problem quite well.
Pendleton's disgusting.
But on the other hand, I think that our top research professors should teach also.
I mean get in the classroom and teach.
I understand Enrico Fermi always taught
freshman physics throughout his life.
He didn't live to be very old.
Every semester that I was a dean, a president, and a chancellor, I taught a freshman section of American history.
Oh, really?
That's a good idea.
And as a result, I had some idea of what was really happening.
Like one time, I found out that the bookstore hadn't ordered the textbooks they were supposed to order on time.
I wouldn't have known that otherwise.
I was able to get that straightened out because of being the chancellor.
And it also helped me hear the excuses, the pleas, the beggings.
Some faculty don't come well prepared.
No, no.
I have sat in on some courses, I won't say which, and well, I don't say they don't know their subject.
They know their subject.
But there's no organization.
And some people can't be heard.
Yeah.
What were the, were there some legendary tough courses?
No, I don't think so.
Not really.
Not to say, you know, nobody said, oh, just don't take that course.
I don't believe that's true.
All right, during all of these years, what was the job market for a freshman undergraduate major in chemistry?
What did freshman chemist, I mean... I mean a BS chemist.
What kind of jobs did they get?
Well, until the last year or two, it was very good.
I mean, just availability was good.
Where would they... Most commonly with an industrial company, and most commonly in a research or development laboratory.
But the jobs were available.
I understand lately it's kind of tapered off.
Well you know we've had this economic slowdown and companies apparently are reluctant to, the hiring of an employee is terribly expensive.
Terribly expensive.
doctoral students about what percentage of them went into academics and what percentage into industry?
Well, the overwhelming majority went into industry.
Into industry?
Yeah.
Heck, I'd say 10% maybe into academics.
And their salary?